docs: WIP-102 - Two-step recover angent update flow (#627)
worldcoin/world-id-protocol: docs/WIPs/wip-102.md

---
wip: 102

> title: Improved Recovery Agent Update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Simplified Recovery Agent Update
```

description: Replace the 3-step recovery agent update flow with an immediate update and revert window, removing the need for a follow-up execute transaction.
author: Jakub Trad (@dzejkop), Kilian Glas (@kilianglas)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
created: 2026-03-31
---

## Abstract

This spec proposes replacing the current 3-step recovery agent update mechanism (`initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate`) with a 2-step flow (`updateRecoveryAgent`, `revertRecoveryAgentUpdate`) that applies the update immediately while preserving the security delay through a revert window.

## Motivation

> In the current contract implementation the user has to first call `initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`. This initiates a 14 day (configurable) period during which the update operation can be cancelled (with a `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate` call). After the period is over anyone can call a permissionless `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate` transaction to finalize the update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current contract implementation the user has to first call `initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`. This initiates a configurable (e.g. 14 days) period during which the update operation can be cancelled (with a `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate` call). After the period is over anyone can call a permissionless `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate` transaction to finalize the update.
```

---
wip: 102
title: Simplified Optimistic Recovery Agent Update
description: Replace the current recovery agent update mechanism with an immediate update and revert window, removing the need for a follow-up execute transaction.
author: Jakub Trad (@dzejkop), Kilian Glas (@kilianglas)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
created: 2026-03-31
---

## Abstract

> This spec proposes replacing the current recovery agent update mechanism (`initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate`), that always requires two transactions, with a new flow (`updateRecoveryAgent`, `revertRecoveryAgentUpdate`) that only requires a second transaction when the update shall be reverted. The proposal preserves the security delay through a revert window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This spec proposes replacing the current recovery agent update mechanism (`initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate`), that always requires two transactions, with a new flow (`updateRecoveryAgent`, `revertRecoveryAgentUpdate`) that only requires a second transaction when the update should be reverted. The proposal preserves the security delay through a revert window.
```

`shall` is imo an extremely weird wording choice here

Reviewer 2: or better still

```suggestion
This spec proposes replacing the current recovery agent update mechanism (`initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate`, `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate`), that always requires two transactions, with a new flow (`updateRecoveryAgent`, `revertRecoveryAgentUpdate`) that only requires a second transaction when the update needs to be reverted. The proposal preserves the security delay through a revert window.
```

This introduces the following issues:

1. The updater has to remember to execute the call after the delay, or someone needs to develop and maintain an auto-executing service.
2. The new recovery agent isn't set on-chain until the delay elapses, which can be problematic e.g. if the user wants to register a Recovery Agent after registering their World ID. The Recovery Agent cannot be sure this has been set up properly for a World ID.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

### Method Changes

The existing 3 methods are replaced with 2 new methods:

| Current                       | Proposed                    |
| ----------------------------- | --------------------------- |

> | `initiateRecoveryAgentUpdate` | `updateRecoveryAgent`       |

Reviewer 3: Would both methods be supported during transition period?

Author: Unfortunately not. When we deploy the new contract version, the old one one will no longer be available.

| `cancelRecoveryAgentUpdate`   | `revertRecoveryAgentUpdate` |
| `executeRecoveryAgentUpdate`  | removed                     |

### Mechanism

> Instead of delaying the recovery agent update on-chain, the `updateRecoveryAgent` function updates the address immediately, records the previous recovery agent in a mapping, and sets a delay on the account. During this delay period an account MUST NOT yet be recoverable with the new recovery agent.

Reviewer: Nit. Capitalize Recovery Agent

```solidity
function revertRecoveryAgentUpdate(
    uint64 leafIndex,
    bytes memory signature, // authenticator signature
    uint256 nonce
) external virtual onlyProxy onlyInitialized {
```

### Interaction with `recoverAccount`

When `recoverAccount` is called, any active recovery agent update (i.e. `invalidAfter` has not yet elapsed) MUST be cleared automatically. This handles the attack scenario where an attacker compromises an authenticator, removes the user's authenticators to lock them out, and initiates a recovery agent update. When the user recovers their account via the recovery agent, the malicious update is reverted as part of the recovery.

## Rationale

This solution preserves the original security properties while enabling better ergonomics and user experience. Notably:

1. **No follow-up transaction required.** The update takes effect immediately, removing the need for an execution step after the delay period.
2. **Equivalent security.** The revert window ensures that an attacker who compromises an authenticator cannot immediately replace the Recovery Agent. Any authenticator retains the ability to revert the change during the delay period.

## Security

> 1. The delay period (default 14 days) MUST be preserved to maintain the security guarantee that a compromised authenticator cannot unilaterally replace the recovery agent.

Reviewer: Let's remove the default, this may end up being more confusing if it changes
